---
layout: page
title: About
---

This is the place where I pen down my thoughts on the topics that interest me. These topics will range from esoteric fields like bioinformatics(because that is what happens to be my field of study) to "simpler" fields like philosophy where almost everyone has something to say.  The posts will always be updated with new information whenever I come across new research or contradictory arguments on the topic I have ranted or lectured on.  The idea is to publish the most terrible, vomit inducing piece and gradually improve it to make it readable and hopefully make into something remotely close to [one of my favorite places on the internet](www.gwern.net). The idea of writing a new blog post every week is probably useful for becoming a better writer but there is something unappealing to churn out word after word without revisiting the topic or revising your initial thoughts. Most of the content on the Internet is visited only once as no one expects to learn anything new from an already read article. And since there's always new content competing for our interests, the incentive to revisit old posts decreases further. This is dangerous because without allowing our brains an opportunity to update our initial thoughts, we run the risk of only [gravitating towards places that confirm to our already held beliefs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Confirmation_bias). I want the posts on this website to stay relevant even ten or twenty years from now. The only realistic method to achieve that is to regularly update my beliefs and remove the incorrect ones. Speculation is acceptable if there isn't enough evidence to increase the probability of alternative hypotheses. [But real humility necessitates that we take actions](http://lesswrong.com/lw/gq/the_proper_use_of_humility/) to correct ourselves rather than apathetically just accept our fallibility.



