---
layout: post
title: "Most happiness pills are invisible and hence impossible to trade"

---

People tend to enjoy acquiring beautiful things by throwing money at them. Be it a sleek car, latest apple products, apparels from expensive brands or even a beautiful "soul mate". This purchase, once complete, is supposed to make them feel better. But do these materialistic transactions really help them in increasing their happiness? Lets ponder on this interesting but now banal topic.

There are couple of obvious reasons why some people like to spend on aesthetically pleasing objects. One is that when a person is earning well, there isn't any alternative method as simple and straightforward as showing off your expensive possessions. The usual thinking goes along the lines of ‘People need to know that I am successful or doing okay with my life and since running around with a stamp of my paycheck on my forehead will be a dick move, lets buy some things that give a signal of my money powers. This strategy works very well as our brains unconsciously associate these beautiful objects with celebrities on TV and movies. So if a stranger seems to carry it, it should imply that the person is somewhat powerful. So they respond significantly  differently to this person if they seem him/her with a highly valued object. This works especially well in cases where people are trying to give false signals of being successful by saving enough to eventually buy a luxurious item, even if it comes at the cost of making a huge dent on your savings account.  The social benefit is irrationally perceived as much larger than this cost(and we know that marketing and advertising play a huge role in bringing about this irrational perception). 

Secondly, adding a high quality expensive object to your lifestyle will definitely make you feel better if it functionally operates as well as marketed. The convenience and efficiency of using a product that always works without fail can induce content that sort of never surfaces but exists in our subconscious mind. The only way to notice its presence is to use a terribly functioning product for a while and then switch to a superior one. In some cases though, the primary reason for its higher price is not that it works well but aesthetically, it looks much nicer than its cheaper alternatives(I am thinking of Apple products). And this appreciation of beauty can be objective and not always a fallacy like <u>[argumentum ad populum](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Argumentum_ad_populum)</u>. So on the whole, the gratification experienced after using them can train our brains to seek for them whenever we feel boredom, frustration or even melancholy, hence creating a positive feedback loop.  

So why isn't <u>[happiness](http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/happiness/)</u> solvable by applying the seemingly simple strategy of seeking and acquiring beautiful things. Problem is, we get used to it. We quickly become accustomed to using those things and this adaptation eventually brings the trivial irritations, back to the surface. So even if you notice your pretty car turning a few heads, the positive feelings associated with this observation fade away gradually by other more persistent worries. People you regularly interact with, won't be awed every  time they look at your stuff. They get used to it too.  Attention gradually comes back to your personality traits like intelligence, work ethic, temperament and your overall demeanor. You cannot save and then throw money at problems associated with these enduring qualities of mind. They require work that unfortunately doesn't overlap with an average person's rather <u>[boring job](http://strikemag.org/bullshit-jobs/)</u> and hence largely remain immutable for most people as they never get to work on them. 

A popular suggestion in the past couple of years has been to <u>[spend money on experiences rather than materials](http://www.lifehack.org/articles/money/this-why-you-might-spend-money-experiences-not-things.html)</u>.  Learn a new skill, take a relaxing vacation or just hang around with good friends more often(if you have them). These experiences tend to stick with people much longer, increasing their average happiness and content overtime. Its easier and more enjoyable to remember a happy and eventful vacation than when the first time you bought an Apple product(although this might not be true for real Apple fanatics who feel high anticipation towards buying some of these products and hence making the act of buying itself a huge experience in the history of their lives). There are exceptions but usually memories become more enjoyable when we aren't experiencing them at all times. It makes sense to remember things that you are not constantly surrounded by. Objects once bought, spend too much time with you. Its quite similar to how someone's interest in their beautiful partners might decrease overtime(after seeing or talking to them everyday for many years). Occasional  experiences tend to take you away from the humdrum of your life and hence the memories associated with them are usually positive. 

But one can argue that this way of looking at things has a logical flaw. Many materialistic goods end up providing us great experiences. As I noted above,  the increased quality of the product can enhance the future experiences one might have using it. Taking a road trip across the country side might be a great experience in itself but it can be made greater if you possess an open roof, high speed vehicle like BMW or Mercedes than a cheaper one like Honda. Same is true with expensive phones which can significantly enhance the quality of the time spent doing work or for leisure compared to an inexpensive one that keeps crashing. These experiences might not stand out in our memories but on daily basis they do happen to bring comfort or avoidance of frustration. And this brings us to the question of what exactly is happiness? Are there different kinds of it? If yes, which of these kinds do people usually want to extract out of their lives? Is it the kind that involves experiencing pleasure on moment to moment basis or is it the one brought upon by remembering our past lives, which we use to judge the quality of our lives as a whole? Maybe there is a right mixture of both that people are usually striving for? These questions make this topic fascinating but also quite hard to answer, especially when you consider the immense variability in humans. Its unreasonable to mindlessly hope that what works for one person would work for everyone without understanding the exact need for the person seeking advice on happiness. In fancier words, we need to <u>[beware of other-optimizing](http://lesswrong.com/lw/9v/beware_of_otheroptimizing/)</u>. In this article, I am not going to explore various forms of happiness that can manifest in different brains. 

It has been argued over centuries by Buddhism and recently shown by couple of popular(but not so good) research papers that <u>[a wandering mind is an unhappy mind](http://www.danielgilbert.com/KILLINGSWORTH%20&%20GILBERT%20(2010).pdf)</u>. This has further been <u>[tested with fMRI scans](http://www.yalescientific.org/2012/05/the-healing-art-of-meditation/)</u> of people practicing meditation, an activity where the whole point of the exercise is to stop this unfocused and sometimes bothersome wandering of the mind. From the article:

>experienced meditators showed deactivation of the part of the brain known as the default mode network (DMN), a region involved in self-referential processing, including daydreaming. All three forms of meditation showed similar results. This discovery is interesting because one of the goals of meditation is to remain focused, and deactivation of the DMN seems to show that meditation is functionally doing just that in the brain. As meditators self-reported significantly less mind-wandering, these results support the hypothesis that deactivation of the DMN is related to a reduction in mind-wandering.


Buddhist monasteries are known for <u>[creating people who appreciate simpler things in life](http://nyoho.com/2012/06/25/monasteries-and-the-real-world/)</u> and these folks lower their threshold for acquiring content. In other words, they become more sensitive to feeling happiness. So another skill people can possibly use to feel happy is to become good at mindfulness but as I have noticed previously this practice is not only hard to do on your own but also requires care if being taught by a trainer or meditation centers. 

We exhaust so much of our <u>[short time on this planet](https://prazas.wordpress.com/2008/08/01/the-average-human-life-is-28000-days-long/)</u> in making decisions towards the perfect thing to buy. Once we possess it and begin using it, within few weeks it becomes like any other thing we previously owned. But most happiness pills are invisible and almost impossible to trade. Understanding this, how can we expect our "immediate gratification seeking" minds to bring us any form of happiness? Or have we completely lost hope on achieving long term content and as a consequence, shift our focus on never ending ephemeral positive feelings?
