---
layout: post
title: "Meditation is hard"

---
On the surface, it seems silly to expect our brains to quiet down by moving into a thoughtless state. Millions of years of Evolution has architect them to think constantly. Thinking comes in different flavors with ever changing ratio between useful and not so useful thoughts. Now the thoughts that occur to us while reading, writing, solving a problem, playing, making love etc. are different in content. But more importantly, the amount of unnecessary chatter that one thinks of while engaging in these activities is also different. It happens to be a direct function of the nature of the activity being performed and that person’s wetware, architected by their genes and personal history(including environment). The intensity of these discursive thoughts(DT henceforth) increases especially when the person goes in an idle mode. Thought after thought keeps appearing without any particular intention. Meditation asks us to force ourselves into this mode and pay attention to it. You see, DT are always lurking around, even when we are engaged in an activity. These engagements never really allow us to pay attention to DT’s true nature. With non-engaging activities like day dreaming, waiting in a queue, traveling to office, DT flood our brains with such force, we think without ever realizing that we are thinking. Its like someone has just played a movie on a screen of our minds. 

Sitting down and asking our minds to pay attention to the breath or a single source of sound like white noise is aking to asking a dog not to eat his favorite cookie that is right in his plate. All instincts immediately start disallowing such absurdity. Without knowing you are moved from observing breath to DT. You notice this distraction and again try to become mindful by resisting for few seconds but the impatient mind immediately pushes back again. This back and forth happens for couple of minutes(maybe less) before you give up and allow your mind to be taken over by DT waiting for this ludicrous resistance from you to end. And the next thing you know, the alarm rings signifying the end of another unsuccessful session.

Yes, Meditation is hard. It is supposed to be hard. Like exercising to build new muscles or getting rid of belly fat, it asks us to engage in an activity that our brain isn’t comfortable with. What makes matter worse is that there almost never a tangible positive feedback at the end of a single meditation session. This lack of reinforcement forces our minds to think of long term benefits and blindly hope that maybe something good will come out of this dull and effortful practice. Nothing might. You may end up crossing your legs and thinking for more than a year without any noticeable benefits. But on the other hand, you might also end up experiencing states that only few humans have ever witnessed and subsequently acquire an ever-present set of lenses that tranform the perception of humanity.

And hence, curiosity is the primary reason that makes me motivated to try out this demanding personal experiment. What is the true nature of our subjective minds? How does it feel to lose the sense of self and observe the world without an ego? How does it feel to feel genuine compassion for someone who is possibly the worst person you know of. Yes, there are pragmatic benefits like better focus and healthier emotional states. And these will probably be experienced much earlier than the naked view of our minds. Still, I think of these as bonuses picked up while striving for the actual objective of experiencing true selflessness.

