---
layout: post
title: "Can disbelief in free will make you a better person?(incomplete)"

---

Forgiveness. I can’t remember the last time I thought to myself ‘I forgive that person’.  Primarily because I dont feel angry or pissed at people who act irrationally, which is just a fancier way of saying "act like jerk". Why don’t I feel any anger? Because even if there is an initial emotional response of frustration, I immediately rationalize it with my belief that humans dont have free will and are just byproducts of their environment and genes. I have gone through this process innumerable times and it has sort of hardwired me to not respond with a negative emotion(not completely though). How can I forgive someone when I don’t even believe they are authoring their own actions? Same logic applies to thanking a person. Although for the sake of politeness and giving positive feedback, I do say ‘thank you’  so that they know they did a helpful act and its appreciated but I don’t really feel thankful in the same way I don’t feel the need to forgive. It sounds as though I am operating like an android but I don’t see it that way. On the other hand, I have noticed that helping people without expecting anything in return brings a soothing calmess followed by a feeling of content. The reason to not expect anything in return is that the factors that would make them return or not are beyond me or that person.

Lack of free will also vanishes the feelings of inferiority and superiority. You accept the fact that some people are more capable than others either because their capability growed in an environment most suitable for it or in some other cases, they inherited just the right amount of genetic code to outperform others. As one can imagine, disappearance of this comparison seeking aspect of the mind also helps in getting rid of emotions like jealousy and pride. This doesn't mean you stop seek self improvement. For example, self pep-talk can be a wonderful environmental input to motivate ourselves to achieve a goal. Getting inspiration from hard working creators is another useful environmental input that people consistently throw at their brains. 

But is it necessarily good to do away with such emotions? There are numerous people who can actually get motivated by them as it drives them to improve their situtaion compared to others. This could be the exact reason why such negative emotions exist in the first place. Take jealousy for example. It usually arises when people compare their status or performance to their peers or colleagues. If I happen to be a low achieving person, either I can simply accept my situation as part of some natural order or feel jealous of others bettering me. Since this this negative emotion consistently bothers the mind and hence makes me miserable, the only way to get rid of it is to fix my current situation by working harder to overcome others. So there is no denying that there is a plausible way in which negative emotions can bring change for one’s own good. Same can be argued for a person fuming with anger and how that occassionaly can have some benefits. 

I don’t have a good reply to such cases except saying that the ratio of suffering caused by them to the good that comes out, is in all likelihood, huge. I personally haven’t met anyone who constantly get motivated by such feelings. And even if they do end up achieving something better, there will always be someone superior to compare against. Where does one stop? By exposing oneself to such emotions consistently, one cannot expect to suddenly switch them off after reaching a relatively higher achieving state. So on average, I believe they are harmful for an individual and societies will be much better without them.


