---
layout: post
title: "On why Philosophy is struggling and what could provide succour"

---

I read an [article that laments](http://mobile.nytimes.com/blogs/opinionator/2016/01/11/when-philosophy-lost-its-way/) about how the field of Philosophy is losing its way. What the authors argue(this argument and others are also in their upcoming book) is that by its delimitation to the academic settings, Philosophy has lost its original purpose which was to explore and communicate to public how to live a good life and how to be virtuous. But they say that the institutionalization of Philosophy created a quandary as to what is the purpose of a Philosopher? They explain:

>This was the act of purification that gave birth to the concept of philosophy most of us know today. As a result, and to a degree rarely acknowledged, the institutional imperative of the university has come to drive the theoretical agenda. If philosophy was going to have a secure place in the academy, it needed its own discrete domain, its own arcane language, its own standards of success and its own specialized concerns.

I agree with the article. Philosophy is in fact in a sad state. Too many conversations of value to normal people, that never come out of the journals. Esoteric language unnecessarily complicates the subject matter for someone trying to extract the larger points present in the papers, which in turn puts off the reader from ever visiting those papers again. They instead switch to only reading popular philosophy blog posts or book by the likes of Peter Singer, Alain de Botton or Sam Harris(who by the way isn't even considered a Philosopher in most academic philosphy forums because he only has a Bachelors in it!). 

But I think a little more can be said about the reasons for why this has happened to Philosophy. This could be a natural progression for any discipline whenever competition amongst its knowledge seekers is high. The ability to stand out for a particular individual is hindered if not for the specializations in that discipline. If there isn't a clear path to probable success, societies have a natural inclination to carve out such a path for that discipline. And that path, for past two or three centuries has always been laid down by academic institutions.  Management is another field that comes to mind. I feel any good philosopher(not necessarily an academic one) should be able to manage people better without any MBA degree, than people with an MBA degree. But of course that won't help the academic institutions that earn profit out of such certifications. Moreover it won't help the emplyers since they are always on a look out for a convenient way to filter good from bad. This tendency of humans(to filter) manifests itself even in racism or racial profiling, so its inevitable that academic degrees - which basically make a person worth anything in today's economy - will also play the same role. Philosophy has naturally succumbed to that force.  

On a less cynical note, this could have also happened to Philosophy because during the course of maturity of a field, the knowledge coming out of it always increases. This means that the copious amount of unpacking makes the field chaotic by increasing the entropy. Unless of course, you have better articulation of the concepts using coherent definitions. And as the number of these agreed upon definitions grows, it becomes harder for normal public to follow along the new concepts and arguments, hence converting many discussions incomprehensible and boring. This is not always true as Peter Singer notes in the comments section of the article I mentioned above:

>It’s very strange that an article like this can ignore the impact philosophy is having on the contemporary world through the teaching of practical or applied ethics. To mention just the two areas in which I have been most involved, philosophers have played crucial roles in the rise of the modern movement to raise the moral status of nonhuman animals, as well as on the emerging movement of effective altruism. Every semester, I see the courses I teach change the lives of my students, who will in turn change the lives of others – and I know that among those who teach practical ethics, this is a common experience. Philosophers may, with few exceptions, have positions in universities, but through those positions, they have influenced, directly and indirectly, the lives of millions of people, and billions of animals. 

Sure Dr. Singer. I believe you and I am sure the authors would too. But the point is that it takes a philosopher with celebrity status to turn his academic ideas comprehensible and attractive to normal public. This positive outcome for the subject of animal ethics wasn't only achieved by Singer's popular books but also by numerous magazines and newspapers that reiterated his ideas for general public, either through his book's reviews or interviews. This topic gained traction also because there are negative effects on global environmental and personal health, associated with factory farming and consumption of meat. But most philosphical topics aren't so tangibly significant. Moreover, our society celebrates very few philosphers(that are otherwise popular in philosophy forums) and Peter Singer is an exception, not the norm. Therefore, I don't think Singer can use his success as a counterargument to author's general concern about the state of Philosophy 

On a related note, I have a speculation to make. I think that this treatment of Philosophy could have played a role in decreasing the spread of critical thinking skills in society. If current generation's interest in philosophical topics has actually declined due to its public image as an esoteric or boring subject, this could be directly impacting the amount of logical thinking or introspection that an average human engages in during the day. The nature of Philosophy is such that doing it <em>requires</em> that you ask questions and instrospect about whatever interests you. So one would think that popularity of this subject would make people a bit more skeptic. But with the constant hedonistic and narcisstic distractions of social media and not many Philosophers to celebrate, the exact opposite seems to be happening(although I agree that claiming critical thinking is declining is too speculative). The shift towards acceptance of Philosophy can only be augmented by academic Philosphers who need to reevaluate the ideas on communicating their arcane philosophical language to general public. Science communication has been at its best for past ten years with authors like Richard Dawkins, Steven Pinker, Neil De Grey Tyson, Brain Greene and many other scientists turning into popular science-authors. As the authors of the article observe:

>people stop listening when philosophers only debate amongst themselves.


There is also concern over lack of diversity(in terms of women and minority) in western institutes. [Eugene Sun Park wrote a rant on why she left Academia](http://read.hipporeads.com/why-i-left-academia-philosophys-homogeneity-needs-rethinking/) which highlights some of the problem that might be contributing to apathy towards this field. I quote here a large paragraph from her article because I think all of it is important for the context:

>As I discovered over the course of my graduate career, in order to be taken seriously in the discipline, and to have any hope of landing a tenure-track job, one must write a dissertation in one of the “core areas” of philosophy. What are these core areas? Philosophers quibble about how exactly to slice up the philosophical pie, but generally the divisions look something like this:

>*Metaphysics & Epistemology
*Logic & Philosophy of Language
*Philosophy of Mind
*Value Theory
*History

>Such is the menu of choices available to the philosopher-in-training today. (See, for example, the PhD requirements at these prominent philosophy departments: Penn, Berkeley, and Duke.) On the surface, this might look like a wide range of options. But appearances are deceiving. For instance, the subfield of philosophy of mind does not typically engage at all with Indian, East Asian, African, or Native American ideas about the nature of mind. It’s as if non-Western thinkers had nothing to say about the matter. Similarly, those who work in the history of philosophy work almost exclusively on the history of Western philosophy—e.g., Plato, Aristotle, Descartes, Hume, Kant, Hegel, Russell, Wittgenstein, etc.

Although I do disagree with her reasons for why such is the case(she thinks its racism). 

If we hope to enlighten coming generations with interesting ideas and questions associated with this complex thing we call Life, we better start working harder to address the issues that face academic Philosophy. 

