---
layout: post
title: "Critical Thinking and Meditation, the duo that can transform societies"

---

I wish to see introduction of two important activities in our education system, critical thinking(CT) and meditation. They seem to be essential in making a generation of people who are not only rational in their thinking but also calmer in their disposition. Although meditation’s benefits are still not widely known around the world(especially in non-Western countries), increasing number of schools are now adding CT in their curriculum. Lets highlight a few points on why these activities are relevant for the upcoming generation. 

To any sane soul, educating someone would naturally include the ability to think clearly on a topic or an idea. It is something that should be present in our schools by default. But of course, most humans are not very sane. We engage in illogical activities almost all the time. Some of it is a consequence of thinking with herd mentality while some of it is our extraordinary focus on fortune and fame. Since we enjoy being part of a group, questioning the majority can be a dangerous and lonely position. Its not hard to think why CT doesn’t exist in our schools in the first place. Instead of educating students to become better human beings, we have been trying to manufacture machines that are "qualified" enough to do particular tasks(albeit not very efficiently). Most of the work that has existed till now is monotonous and requires little to no thinking.  Hence, the current dismal state of our education systems. Our society's apathy towards CT is most  brilliantly displayed in the functioning of our political systems, media outlets and celebrity cultures. The level of manipulation and influence resulting from them has turned most of the individuls in our societies into egoistic self obsessed machines. I would argue(shouldn't have to argue for this obvious claim) that our world could do a lot more of altruistic machines with better bullshit detectors. 

Thinking rationally has numerous benefits. Instead of trusting someone’s claim blindly, you can use the tools to deconstruct their argument and shine the light on the flaws in their reasoning and subsequent claims. This helps in evading extraordinary superstitous assertions by charlatans or defrauders and also decreases influence from "powerful" people who are either manupulating us for their self interests or just befooling themselves. Other than that, it also gives you the ability to create novel ideas in your mind. Since you start seeing the world with an objective lens, you not only find stupidity in human behavior, government policies and news media's operation but thoughts on how to fix the issues of our times(and in our lives) also start eluminating more often. How can you come up with novel ideas if your brain never sees clearly the problems associated with something at the outset? Reflecting on deep questions can also make you wonder on what you really want to do with your life. Its astonishing how few adolescents actually think clearly about their own life and where they want to steer it. The career decisions are either influenced by close friends or family members. For me personally, thinking critically on any matter brings an intellectual stimulation which is quite entertaining. It can be frustrating too sometimes because you notice a lot of stupidity around. But that's another reason why we need to increase the overall number of critical thinkers, to reduce overall stupidity. This would eventually reduce the frustration and pessimism that initial crop of critical thinkers may feel. 

I suggest meditation as the other powerful influencer in transforming humanity because it has been noted to help in depleting one’s ego and increase in compassion for others. With the new distracting advances in technology and an ever increasing individualistic lifestyle, new breed of humans are inclining towards narcissism. Humans will do much better in creating an empathetic and kind civilization by being less materialistic and more simple in their outlook. Why? Because narcissism tends to increase the amount of emotional suffering in societies. People constantly play the game of comparing their social positions with their peers on an abstract "status ladder" and worry about lagging behind. This increases the amount of emotions like insecurity, jealousy, fear and hence increases the overall suffering. And in relation to the point I made above, the existence of these emotions also contaminates our ability to think critically(if we learn to do so), hindering us in reaching the solutions to our flaws that may also play a role in bringing those negative emotions. 

Life is hard. Somehow, even the lives that superficially appear most comfortable, end up being miserable. But the tools that I talk of, can change our minds to tackle with grim looking situations somewhat easily.Even though Critical Thinking and Meditation are fundamentally separate activities, if taught well, they can play a huge role in transforming the lives in our future societies. 