

Everyday I learn new things. This is not bragging. In fact, learning without discipline and a tangible goal in mind has been quite detrimental to my productivity all my life. But abandoning a [book on D3](https://www.manning.com/books/d3js-in-action-second-edition) to suddenly look up [*blue whale mate calling*](http://www.nytimes.com/2008/07/29/science/29whale.html) - as undisciplined as it may be - still qualifies as learning.

But is learning new ideas or concepts everyday really that useful if I am not able to remember most of it? In one sense, it definitely is. It makes me better at researching (digging out signal from noise) and the act of learning itself. It increases the synaptic connections which increases the number of random (some insightful) ideas in my brain. But something still feels missing. I get a feeling that these intellectual travels should be recorded somewhere. I would like to know about the topics my brain thinking and exploring back in 2013.  How often am I coming back to similar genre of topics and learning exact same things? Which may give me some deep insights about my ~~*true calling*~~ genuine interests? Evernote etc. could potentially help in achieving that goal but actively engaging in a topic with writing definitely will make it stick better in my memory. 

Goes without saying that recording your online (or otherwise) intellectual journeys, also helps in improving the quality of writing. Moreover, it forces you to reflect on your understaning of the thing that was learned. Did I really understand how quick sort works or did I just feel I have learnt it by reading about it? 

I have made a few promises on this website over it's 2 year lifespan and I have embarassingly failed to keep most of them. TUD states are the primary culprits for that. Tired, Unmotivated and Distracted. They are constantly looming around me and no doubt that they will try their best to stop me from writing TIL posts. Good news is that they never have been able to stop me from the TIL itself. It seems like that no matter how trivial the learning,  I cannot not learn a new thing everyday. So it is simply a matter of putting it on ~~paper~~ [Typora](https://typora.io/). TIL has always defeated TUD. Here's hoping that it can share some of it's winning powers with the **Writing TIL**. 