I wish to see introduction of the two most important activities that a human should engage in, critical thinking and meditation, in our education system. They seem to be essential to make a generation of humans who are not only rational thinkers but also calmer in their disposition. Although meditation’s benefits are still not widely known, increasing number of schools are adding critical thinking in their curriculum. I will discuss a few points on why its important to introduce these activities in our schools.

To be able to think clearly on a topic or an idea is something that should be present in our schools by default. Humans are irrational beings. We engage in illogical activities almost all the time. Some of it is a consequence of thinking with herd mentality. Since we like to be part of a group,  questioning majority can be a dangerous and lonely position.  So when we talk about ‘educating’ kids, teaching how to think objectively without biases becomes extremely important.  Now its not hard to think why this activity doesn’t exist in our schools in the first place. We haven’t been really education kids. Instead, we are manufacturing objects that can do a particular kind of work. Most of the jobs that have existed till now are monotonous and require little to no thinking. So where is the need for this critical thinking? Its almost as if evolution by natural selection designed our education system(it did indirectly since the system was designed by our brains, which were designed by evolution).

Thinking rationally gives you numerous benefits. Instead of trusting someone’s claim blindly, you can deconstruct their argument to notice its flaws. You can avoid trusting extraordinary assertions  by charlatans and evade defraud. It also gives you the ability to create novel ideas in your mind. Since you start seeing the world with an objective lens, you not only find flaws in human behavior, policies and media but thoughts on how to fix the issues also start coming to light. How can you come up with these thoughts, if your brain never sees any problem at the outset? Reflecting on deep questions can also make you wonder what you really want to do with your life. Its mindblowing how few adolescents actually think clearly about their own life and where they want to steer it. For me personally, thinking critically on matters brings an intellectual stimulation which is quite entertaining. It can be frustrating too sometimes because you notice a lot of stupidity around. But that's one of the main reasons why we need to increase the overall number of critical thinkers, to reduce overall stupidity.

I suggest meditation because it helps in depleting one’s ego and increase compassion for others. With the new advances in technology and an individualistic lifestyle, new breed of humans are inclining towards narcissism. We need humans to be less materialistic and more simple in their outlook. Why? Because narcissism tends to increase the amount of suffering in this world. People compare their position with their peers on a ladder, and worry about remaining behind. Ego depletion also makes you more forgiving towards others' mistakes.

Even though these two are superficially separate activities, I have a feeling(zero evidence, not even anecdotal) that neurologically they sort of give positive feedback to each other and makes one’s ability to do either of them better. I wish to be involved in a project that pays heavy emphasis on these two activities while educating a child. Will keep an eye out. 