As i mentioned in my previous post, heuristics are set of rules that our minds follow when making decisions in life. Content of these decisions could be judgements about people, choosing one course of action over the other or even evaluating oneself. So let's dive right into one of the most common heuristics that our brains are slave to: Availability heuristic. 

Availability of what? Psychologists use the term *availability* to refer to the amount of effort required to recall a particular idea. So availability heuristic is simply a mental shortcut that our minds use to recall a particular idea. Humans don't like to think a lot. So they go with whatever is easily and quickly available in the space of their minds. To understand this better, lets look into an example. 

Humans' collective fear due to threat of terrorism. In U.S., from 9/11/2001 to 12/31/2014, 3066 Americans have died due to different acts of terrorism, both inside and outside U.S.. If you exclude the horrible event of 9/11, only 58 people have died on American soil in those 13 years. Compare this to gun violence in America. In the last five years, the country has experienced more than 10,000 homicides per year. Or compare it to fatalities due to car crashes which goes to over 30,000 per year in each year of the last decade. But simply because an act of terrorism is much more dramatic than a gun shooting or a car crash, it is much publicized. This increases its *availability* in our minds. Because it is much publicized, politicians use it regularly in their speeches to win votes. This further increases its *availability*. This mental shortcut is problematic because it heavily skews our perception of reality. We overestimate less likely threats while underestimating mundane but frequent threats to our lives. 



