---
layout: post
title: "A post cataloging science fictiony ideas"

---


###Recreating snapshots of past using "transhuman memory"

The following idea assumes that we have solved the [Hard Problem of Concsciousness](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hard_problem_of_consciousness) X years from now where I predict that X lies somewhere between 50 and 80 years. But even if this prediction comes out to be true, I still feel its one of those science fiction ideas that has very low probability of turning into reality. My understanding of how memory works is negligible and I will shamelessly make embarrassing assumptions along the way which would be easily discarded by some neuroscientist. But its fun to think about so here it goes.

When I talk about recreating the past, it is not the whole sequence of events. Instead its a finite number of snapshots from that event. Basically like different frames from a movie. With better virtual reality techniques, we might fill the gaps and add more elements in the environment to give an illusion of the the whole past like a movie but it will largely be fake. I would rather have high quality stand alone snapshots from the past than have those snapshots being part of a fake virtual reality.  

Now, imagine an event that happened in your past that also involved some other human being(s). So if you went for camping, imagine the ones where there were other people around you storing memories of that camping trip. The focus here is to recreate a few moments out of that trip. The quality of the snapshot increases with the increase in the number of humans involved in that trip because we have more memories to work with. Now, human memory is largely shitty. But [memory consolidation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Memory_consolidation) does happen and those are the memories you would want to focus on. Moreover, we can only create the events that we believe actually happened. If my friend cannot remember a single thing from the camping trip and even denies that he went to any such trip, the whole idea falls embarassingly. We don't have enough data to work with. So lets assume that she does remember it. We basically hook the brains to whatever machines we will be using at the time to observe the [Qualia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Qualia) and notice the faint subjetive recreation in multiple brains involved in that event. Its almost like trying to get a better panaromic picture by taking pictures of a single object in the space from different angles. 

Its important to note that other subjects are very important because they also play a role in creating your own image associated with that event. You are not storing yourself(your body) when you are storing these memories. Although its probably much better to just throw your image through captured pictures of you from that era than trusting someone else's image of you from that era. But of course it will all depend on the quality of the Qualia.

Other than recreating such a memory snapshot, this tool would also stimulate the brain with relevant "keywords" to demand for more information, especially when available data isn't good enough to capture the snapshots. We have all memories of forgotten memories resurfacing again if stimulated with a set of input relavant to that forgotten memory. This seems to work even with events that happened a decade ago that were never thought of for a decade. This algorithm will have to use this feature of human memory to recreate missing information from the target memory snapshot. These keywords can be as simple as showing images of the camping place or asking the subjects questions relevant to that event. There is no reason to doubt that we will have a near perfect understanding of how memories are formed and stored. So assuming an understanding of the kind of questions that would re-ignite the lost memories doesn't seem like a stretch.

One can argue that a simpler strategy would be to just have a micro camera installed in(or near) your eyes that let you capture all the events of your life. This will definitely be faster to achieve technology wise than creating Qualia reading machines. Once you have such a recording, its just a matter of doing a keyword search for the relavant snippet in the movie of your life. Since tagging of events that are being recorded will happen along the way, it will be a simple matter of searching for tags like "Rakhi", "Camping", "Trip" etc. to dig out the relavant snippet. I haven't thought about the security and ethical implications for such a technology but I am sure better cryptography and elevated morality will allow us to overcome some of those barriers. So yeah, this is a great argument and maybe it completely mutes whatever I said above. But it wasn't as fun to think about!


####A Commenting system that filters bullshit and encourages a well reasoned and civilized discussion.

Its quite clear that majority of humanity, left on its own, is incapable of having civilized and rational discussions on public forums or in the comments section of sites like Reddit and Youtube. This is especially true when it comes to emotionally motivated conversations in domains like Politics and Religion. All kinds of biases and fallacies including personal attacks are used in order to "destroy" the other side. What makes matter worse is that the most emotionally driven comments or ideas(that lack actual content) are actually celebrated and are [more likely to spread](http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1528077) than the ones that are somber(not always) but factually correct. Of course, nobody really changes their mind when faced with this form of counter argument. It wasn't supposed to change anyone's mind in the first place. Its primary purpose was to either receive online accolades by fellow tribesmen(in the form of internet points like likes and upvotes) or to demonize the person who is being disagreed with. Ad hominem attacks are one of the oldest tricks humans have been using to garner support and subdue the other side.

The problem of ranking comments and encouraging healthy discourse is a fascinating one and companies have been trying different strategies to make the system better. Back in 2009, [Reddit introduced the "best" option for sorting](http://www.redditblog.com/2009/10/reddits-new-comment-sorting-system.html) that overcame the problem of comments that would show up at the top largely because they were posted right after the story was posted. As Randall Munroe explains:

>reddit is heavily biased toward comments posted early. When a mediocre joke gets posted in the first hour a story is up, it will become the top comment if it's even slightly funny. (I know this particularly well because I have dozens of reddit fake identities and with them have posted hundreds of mediocre jokes.) The reason for this bias is that once a comment gets a few early upvotes, it's moved to the top. The higher something is listed, the more likely it is to be read (and voted on), and the more votes the comment gets. It's a feedback loop that cements the comment's position, and a comment posted an hour later has little chance of overtaking it -- even if people reading it are upvoting it at a much higher rate.

But this solution doesn't address the issue about the quality of the comments on Reddit which have been degrading consistently over the last few years. This isn't surprising since any community that grows at a high rate will generally bring more noise than signal. There are sub communities in reddit(called subreddits) which never attract a large audience and they still remain great places to hang out in. But reddit provides no mechanism other than "reporting spam" button to **encourage** rational discourse. 

In 2013, Youtube [tried to tackle spams and trolls](http://www.reelseo.com/youtube-comments-system-rolling/) and [failed miserably](http://www.pcmag.com/article2/0,2817,2427715,00.asp). They infamously started forcing people to have a Google+ account to be able to comment and this was at least superficially, argued as a measure to reduce the level of abuse or vulgarness in comments. But nothing changed for the better(in fact, the situation became worse) and they finally [decided to let go of it](http://www.theverge.com/2015/7/27/9047785/youtube-ditching-google-plus-requirement). 

Discourse has been one of the most promising tool in the last few years that deals with the problem of improving quality of comments. Their [Universal Rules of Civilized Discourse](http://blog.discourse.org/2013/03/the-universal-rules-of-civilized-discourse/) highlight the major sources of contamination in a healthy online communication. 

In my hunt for the propsed methods to improve the situation, I came across the idea of a commenting system that consists of different "leagues". Here is that insighful comment from Hacker News:

>A while ago when this very problem for news sites was discussed on an HN thread, someone posted a pertinent question "Why should the discussion of an article occur in the same place as the article itself?". The point that person was making is that all the aggregator sites like HN and Reddit for example, have done a good job providing a forum for commenting on content posted elsewhere (like the NYTimes and WaPo). With that in mind, how would one turn this splintering into manageable communities into a feature. There needs to be a way where there is automatic segmenting based on quality of commentary. Maybe like a Major leagues, minor leagues and troll leagues, where there are two or three simultaneous threads going on. People who've never commented before and have no karma end up in the minor leagues by default. If they get upvoted enough their, their comments go to the major leagues. Likewise, if their comments get downvoted enough it ends up in the troll leagues, where the trolls can quibble among one another.
The hardest part is going to be establishing a culture that reinforces high quality content like here on HN. I can't even begin to see how you build something like that overnight. It takes weeks to months of slow stable growth with really good people to establish a high quality commentary culture that is self policing without using their moderation powers for censorship. I have no earthly idea how you create a feature that promotes the same in a community where hundreds to thousands of commenters are going to show up on day one. Maybe you could launch the comment system as a private beta feature where entry into the private beta is based on posting a really high quality comment and that good enough comments get inducted into the thread so that current private beta people can comment. Once you've posted enough such high quality comments, you get general access to participate. Then, like on HN, you eventually earn the right to upvote comments and one day, with enough points, the right to downvote comments.

I like this idea. But identifying troll from serious arguments that are politically incorrect isn't simple especially when you keep into account the high levels of sensitivity. People tend to get offended very quickly and one needs to tread carefully when being brutally honest. If we allow people to use votes to make the decision of relegating someone to a league of trolls just because they happen to "offend" the majority, then its again a failed system that selectively chooses the people who are like minded in their political ideologies. And this will always remain a problem with a community of people who get to decide who stays in their league or not. So there isn't any completely objective basis on which to relegate(except in obvious cases where the commenter says nothing other than a derogatory or congratulatory statement which don't really add to the discussion). 

That's where I feel Machine Learning will have to kick in. If we can use a [natural language learning algorithm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Natural_language_processing) that does a good job of concluding which comments comprise of a healthy or rational ones and which ones qualify as fluff or troll, we will have some objective basis on which to relegate users to a troll league. Good news is that there are websites to learn from like lesswrong and Hackernews where there are millions of comments that will qualify as healthy. The signal to noise ratio is pretty high for these websites which will make them a perfect dataset for understanding the meaning of a good comment that adds value to a discussion. On the other hand, comments on Youtube and some horrible news website like Drudge Report and Salon have some of the most awful comments sections. These will help in learning the nature of trolls and unhealthy comments. I haven't thought about the features of  these comments that will allow the algorithm to tag them as "A", "B" or "C"(those being the name of different leagues) but one (not so great) feature that immediately comes to mind is the length of the comment. There are major exceptions but in my experience longer comments tend to be more often healthy than not.

Another important thing that worries me is the constant digression from the original topic of discussion. Sometimes they are great and can lead to insighful ideas but on most occassions they distract me as a reader. Could there be a way to "sense" digression and allow the reader to filter out the comments that initiate digression, along with their children?  Its tempting to think of Machine Learning(more specifically [discourse analysis](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Discourse_analysis)) as a solution to this problem too! But until we get very good at understanding human language, the number of false positives and true negatives will spoil the system that tries to understand and detect this deviation. 

Finally, we would need an algorithm that can go through the comment and validate its verity by looking for unstated assumptions or taken for granted facts without any good resources to back them up(exceptions would include safe to assume facts like like "Earth goes around Sun", "Evolution by natural selection" etc.). So even though it might be a great comment and deserves to stay in A league, there could be a tag attached to it signifying that it makes outstanding claims without decent references/evidence. This will be very similar to Wikipedia's strategy of checking citations or sources for something claimed as a fact. This final strategy will heavily increase the standard of quality. One will get to filter even the comments within A league based on the tags attached to them. 

Contemplation or hypothesizing should obviously not come under this scrutiny and one can simply have some options to chose the level of belief they attach to their comment. For example, If I make a hypothesis, I get to choose a tag called "speculation" that disallows the algorithm to run its bullshit detectors on my comment. Hopefully the community will be constantly helping the algorithm to learn because initially there are bound to be many false positives and false negatives. 


Another idea that we need to look into is tools that allow humans to write structured comments. This would mean that these tools will make future tasks easier for themselves because as they make it convenient for people to structure their comments in a more methodical way. Hypotheses, anecdotes, facts are much more easier to deduce once the user can either annotate their comments or use specific keywords to make annotation easier for algorithms. 