The subreddits on the link sharing and discussion website Reddit, are sub-forums associated with different topics like politics, sports, science etc. If you visit a subreddit, it's behavior is similar to a person's Twitter or Facebook account. Different posts are either "uprooted" (retweeted/liked) or ignored by people who follow a subreddit. Even non-followers get to upvote a post if it goes viral (exactly like Twitter).  The number of followers increase if the subreddit consistently produces good posts (tweets) and regularly manages to show up on the front page of the reddit. 

In the case of a twitter account, the incentive to tweet good stuff is to get more followers. It is directly beneficial to the individual who owns the account. In case of a subreddit, the growth is dependent on it's followers who have their own incentives, which is to get more "karma". Interestingly, this incentive structure is also seen in Nature among so called Superorganims. These are formed by large groups of social insects like ants or termites. The individual ants work tirelessly towards their own goals (of collecting food, building mounds) without any thought about superorganism's "needs". 

But this similarity among subreddits and superorganims isn't really surprising, is it? An entity that consists of multiple living organisms that are working to achieve their own goals, is bound to take a life of its own. Especially if there are multiple such entities in a single ecosystem that are competing for same resources. In this case, that would be multiple subreddits within the Reddit ecosystem competing for our attention.

